HINT
-Create database
-Create a Table/Model in it, to store data (using ORM)
-Create API where you use ORM to manipulate data

SET 1 (TEAM 1)

Hotel Management System:

The desk officer should be able to add new customers and their personal as well as booking information. One customer can book many rooms and there can be many types of rooms (Single, Double, Deluxe, etc). The booking details should include the check-in and check-out date as well as cost and payment information.
Each room must have its specific price and payment should be calculated accordingly. There can be many rooms in a hotel and the room status should be tracked. For example, whether a room is available or not.
Users should be able to calculate the price of the stay. For example, if a customer wants to stay for 5 days in a single room that costs Rs 2000 per day. The total cost of Rs 10000 should be returned.


SET 2 (TEAM 2)

Learning Management System.
Users should be able to create programs, add semesters in programs, add courses in each semester, add sections, add students in semester programs, and add instructors in programs. 
Users should be able to view the total students and  instructor list, Number of students in [each semester, each program, each section.]
Users should be able to view courses that are taught each semester and show sections of each semester. show instructors of each semester.


SET 3 (TEAM 3)

Library Management System.

Users should be able to add books and their categories such as non-fiction, autobiography, and so on. A book can belong to more than one category. Add users, each user should have a unique username. A user can borrow up to 3 books at a time. A user can return any book he has borrowed at any time.  A book’s description, category, name, and author’s name can be updated only if the book has not been borrowed. 
Show total list of books(including count), show total users, show books on the basis of category given[multiple categories can be provided], show which book is famous among users[top 5], show which category of book users like most[show top 5].  On the basis of username, find the category of the book he/she prefers.
